This topic will cover considerations when choosing an audio codec and a comparison between different audio codecs.

## Audio Codec Selection

The following are some audio codec considerations:

- Call quality

- Network latency and reliability

- Endpoint support

- Codec complexity

- Transcoder avoidance

- Bandwidth


A codec is a software algorithm that compresses and decompresses speech or audio signals. There are many standardized codecs that are used in VoIP networks.

When selecting a codec to use within an enterprise environment, consider the following:

- **Bandwidth:** Usually the first consideration when selecting a codec, especially when considering total consumption of bandwidth for multiple simultaneous calls over low-speed WAN links. On the LAN, bandwidth is not paramount because most networks will have 100 Mbps at a minimum, with many networks now having 1 Gbps to each endpoint.

- **Call quality:** Second to bandwidth is the call quality the codec is capable of providing. In the past, call quality was an especially important consideration, although, in recent years, it is not an important deciding factor because all mainstream codecs offer premium quality calls. The most common method for quality score is the Mean Opinion Score (MOS). Although there are other methods available, MOS is still the first score most people will look at. The score is between 1 to 5, with 5 being perfect face-to-face quality and 4.3 being the highest quality possible over a phone because of the Nyquist theorem.

- **Network latency and reliability:** The reliability and latency of your network will have an impact on the quality of the call more so than the quality score for the codec. However, there are differences between codecs in their ability to conceal latency and packet loss issues experienced on the network.

- **Endpoint support:** Codecs improve year over year, and although the latest codecs often offer the lowest bandwidth and highest quality, it is imperative to identify codec support of the current endpoints in the environment. The introduction of new codecs might require transcoding (translating from one codec to another), which will require additional resources until all endpoints support the newer codecs.

- **Codec complexity:** Each codec has a different amount of compression that it needs to perform to maintain its quality score and bandwidth usage, so different amounts of processing power are needed for different codecs. This processing power is often consumed on the DSP chips on the routers. Knowing how much processing a codec requires will help determine scalability issues with existing and future hardware.

- **Transcoder avoidance:** Transcoders allow endpoints that have incompatible codec support to communicate with each other through the transcoder, which will translate between the two codecs in use. Transcoding, however, comes at a resource cost because DSP resources are needed. Avoiding endpoints that are incompatible from a codec point of view will remove this resource requirement.


## Audio Codecs Compared

|Codec|Payload Bandwidth (kbps)|Developed|Band|Sampling (kHz)|Released|MOS (out of 5)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|G.711|64|ITU-T|Narrowband|8|1972|4.3|
|G.722|48 / 56 / 64|ITU-T|Wideband|16|1988|---|
|iLBC|15.2 / 13.3|Global IP Solutions*|Narrowband|8/16|2002|4.14|
|OPUS|6-510|IETF|Mixed|8/12/16/24/48|2012|---|
|G.729|8|ITU-T|Narrowband|8|1996|3.92|

* Acquired by Google in 2011

1. **G.711** is an ITU-T standard that uses PCM to encode analog signals into a digital representation by regularly sampling the magnitude of the signal at uniform intervals and then quantizing it into a series of symbols in a digital (usually binary) code. The voice samples created by the PCM process generate 64 kbps of data.

2. **G.722** is an ITU-T standard wideband speech codec operating at 48, 56, and 64 kbps. G.722 is typically used in LAN deployments, where the required bandwidth is not prohibitive. Unlike G.711, which has a sampling of 8 kHz as per the Nyquist theorem, G.722 has double the spectrum size at 16 kHz. In this type of deployment, G.722 offers a significant improvement in audio quality over older narrowband codecs, such as G.711, without causing an excessive increase in implementation complexity. Cisco Unified Communications Manager calculates G.722 with 64 kbps.

3. **iLBC** is a speech codec that is suitable for robust voice communication over IP. The codec is designed for narrowband speech and results in a payload bit rate of 13.3 kbps. The CPU load is like the G.729A, with higher quality and better response to packet loss. If there are lost frames, iLBC processes voice quality issues through graceful speech quality degradation. Lost frames often occur with lost or delayed IP packets. Ordinary low-bitrate codecs exploit dependencies between speech frames, which unfortunately results in error propagation when packets are lost or delayed. In contrast, iLBC-encoded speech frames are independent, so this problem will not occur.

4. **G.729** is the compression algorithm that Cisco uses for high-quality 8-kbps voice. G.729 is a high-complexity, processor-intensive compression algorithm that monopolizes processing resources.

5. Although **G.729A** is also an 8-kbps compression algorithm, it is not as processor-intensive as G.729. G.729A is a medium-complexity variant of G.729 with slightly lower voice quality and is more susceptible to network irregularities such as delay, variation, and "tandeming." Tandeming causes distortion that occurs when speech is coded, decoded, then coded and decoded again, much like the distortion that occurs when a videotape is repeatedly copied.

6. The **Annex B** variant of G.729 is also a high-complexity algorithm that adds VAD (Voice Activity Detection) and CNG (Comfort Noise Generation) to the codec. VAD detects silence that occurs in typical conversations. This silence is present when one end is talking and the other is listening. The listening end can have the Real-Time Transport Protocol (RTP) stream that is going toward the talker temporarily suppressed. The benefit of this suppression is an approximate 35 percent savings in bandwidth. The RTP stream is reactivated upon the detection of sound on the listening end, which can cause clipping of the first syllable when the RTP stream restarts. With traditional voice circuits, users are used to hearing white noise. When users switch to digital circuits, the lack of white noise can be mistaken for a disconnection. CNG inserts white noise into the line to accommodate users who are changing from traditional voice circuits.

7. **G.729AB** is a medium-complexity variant of G.729B with slightly lower voice quality.

8. **Opus** is an open, royalty-free codec standardized by the IETF in 2012. It supports bitrates from 6 kbps to 510 kbps and sampling rates between 8 kHz (narrowband) to 48 kHz (full band). This sets opus apart from other codecs as it has an unmatched quality for interactive speech and music transmission. It has support for CBR and variable bitrate (VBR). It is the codec of choice when using Webex.